Well, welcome to the last session of the
day and the last session of this week,
I think.
I think we're the last on the calendar.
I mean, there are lots of other
sessions running at this time,
but this is the last one in this hall.
And this session is really
important in many ways,
primarily because Speech Recognition
and Synthesis plays such a key part
in the universal access component
of the next release of Mac OS X,
Jaguar, known as Jaguar.
And your application can build on the
speech technologies that are in Jaguar
and gets a lot of stuff for free,
and we're going to explain
what those things are,
and then can do a lot of extra stuff
to make your speech synthesis or
recognition work even better and
get better performance out of that.
So speech is a really important component
in terms of our universal access.
It's also a really important component
in terms of providing a full,
complete user experience
on Mac OS X because the
technology is really great.
So to go more in-depth on this stuff,
I'd like to introduce Kim Silverman,
who runs the
Speech Technologies Group at Apple.
Thanks, John.
Thanks.
Hi.
First of all,
I'd like to thank you all for
staying till the end of a very long
and very exhausting conference.
You know,
I think four out of the last five WWDCs,
Speech has been the last
session of the conference,
and we've learned that one advantage of
that is that only the people who really
want to know about Speech are there.
So thanks for being here.
Can I ask,
since it's a little sparse in here,
that you come forward.
Move forward.
I know you're probably tired
and sitting and comfortable,
but if you can find it
within your legs to move,
come on forward so that we can
have a more intimate session here.
Thanks.
Yeah, come on up, come on up.
There are plenty of seats down the front.
You'll enjoy yourselves more.
Okay.
So what we're going to talk
about today is a little bit
about why to adopt Speech,
but we're not going to spend much
time on that because we think
it will become obvious as you
come through the presentation.
Then we'll talk mainly about introducing
what's new in Jaguar and then take you
through some scenarios as developers
of what should you adopt first and
we'll describe what we would consider
to be a good adoption of speech,
a better adoption of speech and
then the best adoption of speech.
So this is me.
Okay, to start off,
I know that there are a bunch
of people here who are familiar
with the Speech that we've
been shipping for a while,
and there are also people here
who are new to the platform.
I know there are a whole lot of
people who've come over from Unix
and people coming over from Windows.
So I'd like to first of all
bring everybody up to speed.
Those of you who are already
familiar with the Mac,
please bear with me.
I'm going to talk through briefly
what we have been shipping in
the previous version of OS X.
Is this microphone on?
Great.
I'd like demo machine number three,
please.
Great.
Okay.
You turn on Speech from the
Speech Preferences panel.
Under the Speech Recognition tab,
there's an On switch.
Let's get it to say a few things and
then we'll talk about how it works.
It dynamically adapts itself
to the acoustic environment
in which it's finding itself.
So I have to now give it a chance
to adapt itself to me being up here
speaking into a large auditorium with
echoes of whatever the wavelength of
this room is and through a PA system.
So bear with me for a moment.
What time is it?
It's 5:03.
What day is it?
It's Friday, May 10th.
Usually it takes between
one and three sentences.
If you're using it,
and you've been using it successfully in
one room and then you shift to another,
expect maybe the first
one or two utterances,
it will act like it's not hearing you.
That's when the adaptation happens.
Okay.
Just a moment while we...
[Transcript missing]
Okay, let's see.
Quit this application.
Get my mail.
Open my browser.
Hide this application.
Let's scroll this page down a bit.
Actually, I can do this by speech.
Move page down.
We'll select some text here.
Copy this to the clipboard.
Switch to Mail.
Reply to this message.
Reply to sender.
I'm glad that happened.
We'll refer to that,
what just happened in a moment.
Paste the clipboard here.
Send this message.
"I'm going to quit this application.
Alright, let's try switch to chess."
Pawn D2 to D4 Oh boy,
I'm thinking on my feet here.
Knight B1 to C3
That made it think.
Look at that.
Uh-oh, I'm in trouble.
He's going to bring his bishop out.
This lets me do something that my
13-year-old son will never let me
do when I'm playing chess with him.
It lets me say, take back move.
Okay, let's talk a little bit
about how this works.
We have a Speech Recognition
engine which has a well-documented,
mature API,
and applications can call this engine.
We ship some applications that call it,
and some of you guys do,
and we hope after today more of you will.
The Speech Recognition
Engine itself has a number of
characteristics that are important.
First of all, it's speaker independent.
You don't have to train it to your voice.
You just open it up and turn
it straight on and use it.
For example,
I had trashed the preferences
just before we came up,
so what you've seen me do here
is straight out of the OS X CD.
There's no adaptation to your voice.
Secondly,
it's a continuous speech engine.
You don't have to pause between words,
which is a great relief.
It's a continuous speech engine
and it has a large vocabulary.
We have 120,000 words in the dictionary.
If a word is not in the dictionary,
then we decompose it linguistically.
We know about known endings and
word components and look up its
stems in the dictionary and then
reconstruct its pronunciation.
If that doesn't work,
then we fall through to statistically
trained letter-to-sound rules,
trained with classification
and regression trees,
and we have different sets of rules
for names and for the rest of English.
So it's a large vocabulary engine.
And we use it for command and control.
The way we do this is driving
it by a finite state grammar.
That means to call the engine,
you tell it what to listen for.
You express that as,
in the simplest case,
a flat list of commands,
or you can give it a full grammar,
such as set up a meeting
with name at time,
where within the grammar,
name would then expand to, say,
all of the names in your address book.
Okay,
so what I've been showing you here has
been a combination of a couple of things.
First of all, the chess application,
since it's in front of us,
is an application that's a
front end to GNU Chess and
that calls the API directly.
The rest of what I was doing,
which I turned on from
the speech preferences,
is an application called Speakable Items.
From the Speech Preferences,
you turn that on under the On/Off tab
of the Speech Recognition tab.
Now,
Speakable Items is a very simple idea.
When you first turn it on,
we create a folder in your home directory
called the Speakable Items folder.
Open the Speakable Items folder.
Anything that's in this folder
can be launched by speaking it,
and it's just the same
as double-clicking on it.
So anything that you can
launch by double-clicking,
you can launch by speech.
Applications, documents, folders,
anything that you can double-click on.
We pre-populate that Speakable
Items folder with a kind of
a starter kit of a few basic
commands that can get you going.
The ones I've been saying
today are all there.
What day is it?
What time is it?
But the real power of this is that
you can add your own items to it,
and thereby customize the
Speech Recognition for the way you work.
All right.
Let's talk about the structure of
the user interface for a little bit.
This is our Speech Feedback Window.
It has a number of components.
Speech Feedback Window:
The Speech Feedback Window,
as we have found over the years
with using Speech Recognition,
gives users the minimum amount of
information they need to help have
a successful experience with Speech.
If I turn it on, it should come back up.
Okay.
You can see that it
says ESC in the middle.
Is the screen large enough?
Can you see that?
Who can't see the ESC?
I don't see any hands,
so I guess you can see it.
Good.
That means that by default,
the push-to-talk key is the escape key.
That means when the
escape key is pressed,
it's listening,
and when the escape key is not pressed,
such as now, it's not listening.
Good thing.
Otherwise,
it would be trying to recognize
me while I'm talking to you.
And there's an important point there.
If you put Speech Recognition into
your products and you're demoing it,
demo it in push-to-talk mode,
because while you're demoing,
you'll be talking about it.
Across the industry,
Speech Recognition technology is good
at recognizing what you say to it,
but it's not good at knowing
when you're not talking to it.
When I press the push-to-talk key,
the escape key,
the ESC disappears and the
microphone stops being grayed out.
You see that?
That shows me that the
application is not wedged,
it's running,
and I've got the right push-to-talk key.
And then there are some lines,
colored lines down the bottom.
You see blue, green and red?
They are a VU meter.
They're just like the VU meters
or the LEDs on your home stereo.
And they tell you that the
microphone is connected,
it's working.
They also give you a measure
of the background noise and
of how loud you're speaking.
If I press it now and don't say anything,
You see there's about
one line of blue there?
That's measuring,
although we may not notice it,
but there's quite a lot of
background noise up here.
The buildings, air conditioning,
the noise coming from next door,
or the hums from a... Oh gosh,
far more computers here
than I would like to own.
When you're using it,
we can cope with one,
maybe two lines of noise.
Above that,
performance starts to degrade.
So if you try it on the train,
in the subway, you might find that
there's too much noise.
As I speak,
if I get too close to the microphone,
I see lots of red.
That means it's clipping.
If you speak to it and
it doesn't recognize you,
don't yell,
because that also will make it clip.
You don't want there to be any red.
While I speak,
you can see that there are some black
triangles moving towards the microphone.
See them up there?
They kind of look like angelfish.
That shows that the Speech Recognition
search is happening.
So whenever you see those,
you know it's trying to recognize me.
One of the user interface issues
with Speech is knowing what to say.
We'll have more interesting
things to say about that later,
but let me just show you the current
user interface for dealing with that.
Open the Speech Commands window.
Whenever any application
runs the Speech Recognition
Engine and calls the API,
it gets these two pieces
of user interface for free:
the Speech Feedback Window and
the Speech Commands Window.
The Speech Commands Window is
a nice Cocoa application.
Love Cocoa.
It's divided into two parts.
The top part shows you what has just
been recognized and if it spoke back
to you it shows you what it said.
The bottom part is broken
into different sections.
This one called Speakable Items
with a disclosure triangle shows
us what's in the top level of
the Speakable Items folder.
For example, well,
cancel last command is up there.
That's one of the items in
the Speakable Items folder.
In OS X, unlike in OS 9,
we keep track of all the
applications that you ever
run while Speech is running.
Now let me talk a little bit
about user interface issues here
and be a little controversial,
perhaps even with my own management.
The Aqua user interface is designed
to be uncluttered and very elegant.
And I think it succeeds in doing that.
There's not much clutter on the screen
and the dock lets you very quickly
get to those things that you've
put there that you run most often.
The problem though is that there are some
things that are more difficult to get to
because of this uncluttered interface.
So with Speech Recognition running
it means that you can go directly to
any application that you've ever run.
If I open this out we'll see,
this is just what I have
running on my desk,
this is my development machine actually,
and you can see there's
lots of stuff in there.
And so I can say any of these commands
and it will switch to that application.
Let me try just say switch
to Internet Explorer.
And there it is,
it comes to the foreground.
And that leads me to the next thing
to show you about Speakable Items.
Open the Speakable Items folder.
In the Speakable Items folder,
There is a folder called
Applications Speakable Items.
That folder contains folders
that are named by applications.
The items in those folders
are only speakable when that
application is in the foreground.
So for example,
when I said switch to Internet Explorer,
you may have noticed another
section appeared here.
Here it says finder.
The finder is in the foreground and
there are a bunch of commands here
that are in the finder specific
application speakable items and so
are only speakable at the moment.
If I switch applications, you watch,
you'll see that the recognizer's
language model dynamically changes.
Switch to Internet Explorer.
Switch to the Finder.
You see it changing there?
Switch to Internet Explorer.
Close the Speech Commands window.
Get Apple's stock price.
Check it up,
I actually don't know what it is.
Move page down.
Looks too far.
Oh, our stock's doing pretty well,
look at that.
Okay, what did I just do there?
You can make web pages speakable.
[Transcript missing]
All right.
Within the application-specific Speakable
items that we ship for Internet Explorer,
there's one that's called
Make This Page Speakable.
This is really cool.
What's your favorite web page?
You, what's your favorite web page?
Yes, you, in the gray top.
I'm sorry?
ZMAC.
How do I spell that?
Zed, loud voice, nice clear voice, Zed.
M-A-G dot.
[Transcript missing]
and it will make a guess as to
what I would like to call it by
looking at the content of the page.
I can just go with that
or I can change it.
Let's call this go to the Znet
And that's it.
So let's see, I'll go to another page so
we know we're not cheating.
Go back.
All right.
Go to the Znet page.
There we go.
Thanks.
So the way that that happened was
the application-specific item for
Internet Explorer that we ship,
called Make This Page Speakable,
took a copy of the URL for
that page and put it into the
Internet Explorer application-specific
folder.
And there it is, right there.
We find our buddies at Apple that
use this generally have 10 to 30,
sometimes 50,
webpages speakable by voice.
Okay, so that's a brief walk through
the structure and architecture
of what we've been shipping.
Now let's talk about...
Let's talk about what's new in Jaguar.
We've improved the Speech Recognition,
we've improved the Speech Synthesis,
we've improved the User Experience,
and we've improved the
Developer Experience.
Let's talk about the
Speech Recognition first.
We've improved the accuracy,
we've been working a lot on that.
We've increased the robustness
against background noise.
If you were up here,
you would hear how loud it is.
We've continued to work closely and
painfully hard with the hardware groups
to make sure that the microphones that
ship in our hardware are optimized
to work with Speech Recognition.
This is important.
This is an advantage that Apple has.
Since we own the hardware and the
audio layers and the operating
system and the Speech Recognition,
we can make them all work
together in a way that's very
hard for other developers.
and we have, you'll be glad to know,
improved the compatibility with
third-party USB microphones.
Let's talk about the
Speech Recognition accuracy,
its performance for a moment.
Now, Speech Recognition performance is
notoriously difficult to measure.
The way we measure it is, traditionally,
we take a recording of several
hundred spoken commands,
spoken by six different people,
three female and three male,
at different volumes,
and we play these several hundred
commands over and over again,
overnight, from a loudspeaker in front
of the Mac we are testing,
at the volume of a normal person.
We take a couple of measures.
First of all,
you may have noticed while we
were working up here and while
you were working at your desk,
sometimes there will be noises in
your office that are not speech.
Door slams, telephone rings, coughs,
paper shuffling.
We have to make sure that we don't
try to search those in the speech,
against the speech grammar,
and so we have models for
lots of sounds like that.
The first thing that happens when
Speech comes into the Recognizer is we
test it against those models of noise.
And if it matches one of those
better than it matches Speech,
then we reject it as
being background noise.
Now we have tuned up the
Speech Recognizer to prefer to
reject than to make a wrong choice.
And so it turns out that this rejection
performance is the most sensitive
measure of the performance of a
microphone and of the Recognizer.
When we started work on
this back in the OS 8,
OS 9 timeframe, the percentage of times
that it falsely rejected,
that is,
that it heard Speech and thought, no,
I'm not confident enough,
I'll class that as noise,
was 22.5%. Then when we released OS 10.1,
we managed to halve that down to about
10%. And now currently in Jaguar,
our latest measurements on an iMac,
we've halved it again
down to 5%. Thank you.
Now what's really important is
if it thinks something is speech,
it tries to recognize it,
it had better make the right decision.
You don't want to say,
open my browser and
have it empty the trash.
So the next thing we measure is,
of those spoken commands that
it accepted as being speech,
how accurate is it?
Well, back in the OS 8, OS 9 time frame,
the error rate was 4.5%.
When we got to OS 10.1,
we'd reduce that by a factor of 3,
down to 1.5%. And in our current
measurements with Jaguar,
we've currently reduced that
again by another factor of 3,
it's down to 0.5%. Devang, he's the man,
Devang.
Dr.
Nike.
Okay,
we've been working on Speech Synthesis.
In the engine itself,
we've been working on the
quality to make it sound more
natural and easier to understand.
We've been improving the
voice signal processing.
We've put a lot of work
into the intonation,
the tune, the rhythm, the pitch.
Now that's important for you to
be able to follow the meaning
and for it to sound more natural.
We've reduced the number of
pronunciation errors and we have
actually modelled intonation now unlike,
I think, just about any other
synthesiser that I know.
Not at the level of the sentence,
but at the level of the paragraph.
Now let me talk about this for a moment.
We're working hard on the synthesis.
We have put more work into
Speech Recognition than into
Speech Synthesis over the last
few years because that's where
the greatest market need has been.
And now we're correcting that balance.
So we've been working
hard on the synthesis.
We continue to work
hard on it for Jaguar.
What I'm going to show you
now is a work in progress.
Can we switch back to
demo machine number... No,
no, I'm right here.
I have the stuff right here.
What am I talking about?
Okay,
so one thing we've added is paragraph
intonation and topic tracking.
Let me be clear about what we mean here.
As we read out a paragraph,
we build up a model of the listener's
internal representation of the
concepts introduced in that paragraph.
And we annotate that in the intonation.
So I'll show you this paragraph for you.
This is a paragraph that I pulled
out of the Mac OS X edition of
the World Book Encyclopedia.
It's a great application.
Check it out.
I'll play this in two versions.
First version is passing that
text to the speech synthesis in
the shipping version of OS X.
And then the current work
in progress with Jaguar.
So here's the shipping version first.
As computers have grown more powerful
and their functions more various,
the size of computer programs
has grown dramatically.
Because of their large size,
many modern programs are
distributed on CDROMS.
Okay, let's see how we do now.
See if you can hear a difference.
As computers have grown more powerful
and their functions more various,
the size of computer programs
has grown dramatically.
Because of their large size,
many modern programs are
distributed on CD-ROMs.
"Hold your applause, hold your applause.
Okay, there have been some
discontinuities in the signal.
We've been working on those.
Here's an example of a
rather strange sentence.
You'll hear this on OS 10.1
and then in the Jaguar version.
First, 10.1."
Without these problems,
go at those targets, get the news.
And now in Jaguar.
Without these problems,
go at those targets, get the news.
Hear a difference?
No, hold your applause,
hold your applause.
We've worked on word pronunciation
because although the dictionary is large,
some words have been mispronounced.
So here's,
I've gathered together a few examples
of things that we've got wrong.
Listen to this.
This is first of all
what's shipping in 10.1.
May zillions and deathy a potions
with al-al-he-amers get a remail
with that look via pee-pee-poey.
I've got to do that again,
that's so much fun.
Listen to this.
Those of you, has anybody been playing
with a synthesis?
Are these problems representative
of what you've been hearing?
Yes, yes.
Okay,
let's just listen to that one again.
Maze Aliens and Ethia Potions
with Al-Al-Hiamers get a remail
with that look via PP Poey.
Alright, I love that PP Poey.
Ha ha ha.
Alright,
here's the current version of Jaguar.
Brazilians and Ethiopians
with Alzheimer's get their
email with Outlook via PPPoE.
Thanks.
No, no, hold your applause.
Hold your applause.
A big problem for word pronunciation is
no matter how extensive your dictionary,
people create words on the fly.
It's one of the wonderful,
rich things about language,
particularly Germanic languages where
we concatenate items together in text.
So here's a bunch of examples of
things that we tend to encounter,
and if I added all of
these to the dictionary,
it wouldn't give me any help
because next time I have some text,
there'll be more of them.
I have these in increasing difficulty.
We'll just read them out
with the OS X version.
I'm sorry, the Jaguar version.
Myfile.cp Readme.txt Smiley
Face Apple Lovers Jobsification
George Bush for President.info
SummonAccreditedUniversity.edu/phonen
umbers.html Okay,
now you can applaud.
As I said, this is a work in progress.
This is a little bit further
ahead from what you have on
the Jaguar CDs that you've got,
but we hope that you'll track
this and we're having a great time
finally folding into the code base
research advances that we've been
making over the last few years.
Alright, we've made some improvements
to the user experience.
One, as you may have seen already,
is that there's a screen
reader built in for free.
For free for you.
That means that you with your
applications will get the benefit of it.
It reads any text on the screen,
including any selected text.
Users can navigate the entire system.
Menus and front windows, controls,
all of the buttons and so on
can be spoken by the system
and can be spoken by the user.
And we have talking notifications,
so applications that need your
attention can do more than just
jump up and down in the dock.
They can talk to you.
Let's demo some of those improvements.
Could I have demo machine number four,
please?
Okay.
Okay, once again I'm going to have to let
this machine adapt to my voice as it
sounds in this acoustic environment.
What time is it?
It's 17:29.
What day is it?
It's Friday, May 10.
Okay, I think we're there.
Alright, we have added a tab
at the top level of the
Speech Preferences called
Spoken User Interface.
This tab controls how the
computer speaks to you.
For those of you who remember from OS 9,
Talking Alerts is back.
Thank you.
So you can have any time an
alert or a sheet comes up,
you can have it spoken to you.
Now the aim of this is that
you should never hear it.
That is, alerts or sheets should
come up on the screen,
you read them, you think about them,
you respond to them, they go away.
There shouldn't be any speech.
But if your attention is away from
the machine and you're staring out
the window or crawling around on
the floor plugging in cables and
you don't respond after a while,
the machine can then
get your attention back,
not just by going beep,
but by reading out the
content of the alert.
Because of that delay,
we ship it with a delay between the time
the alert appears and it gets spoken.
By default, that delay is 10 seconds.
I will move it back to zero for
now so that we don't have to wait.
For those of you who
remember Talking Alerts,
you can now give it a different
voice from the rest of
speech output in the system.
The voice of the messenger
already contains some information
for the listener about the
identity of the message.
Let's do a demonstration.
Alert.
This is a demonstration of
your Talking Alert settings.
Use these settings to customize
how your alerts are spoken.
Okay.
Now there's some other
Speech output as well.
One is that we can get the computer
to talk to us when an application in
the background requires our attention.
Let me give you an example.
I'll turn that on.
And let's switch to Internet Explorer.
and I'll open up a new page here.
So let's try going to a web
page that doesn't exist.
Let's go to some-nonsense.com.
[Transcript missing]
Excuse me,
Internet Explorer needs your attention.
There it goes.
Okay.
I can see it saying "meep, meep." Okay.
You can use a hotkey to speak any
selected text in any application.
We ask you to define
what the key would be.
For example, I'll make it Command F11.
Now this is useful for
people with disabilities,
but we think it's also
got general usefulness.
For example,
you'd like your email read out by the
computer while you stare out the window,
while you shuffle papers on your desk.
Rather like hearing your
voicemail over a speakerphone.
Or perhaps, here's an example,
you're looking at a spreadsheet.
You've just typed in your
budget and you want to make sure
you've got the figures right.
Well checking them against
the paper and the screen,
who's done that?
It kind of gets a bit tedious, right?
So now you can select the numbers
that you've typed in and just hit
that hotkey and they'll be spoken.
[Transcript missing]
Now there are already two important
messages for you developers.
One is every dialogue, every alert,
every sheet that you have in your
application can now be spoken.
So test with that and
make sure they sound okay.
You might want to reword some of them.
The second message is every piece
of text that's selectable in your
application can now be spoken.
So test with that to make sure
it works the way you want it to.
The next thing we've done is
allow you to speak the text
that's actually under the mouse.
[Transcript missing]
The message here is:
Even if text is not selectable
in your application,
it's likely to be spoken anyway.
So test with that so that you
as an application developer
don't get embarrassed when
your application sounds stupid.
Notify when an application
requires your attention.
Okay.
So far we've been talking about
the computer talking to you,
but it's also possible now for
you to talk to the computer.
That is, anything that can be spoken
by the computer to you,
you can speak back.
We have two extra controls.
There's an extra tab under
Speech Recognition called Commands,
and that lets you turn on and off
different sections of speakable items.
Do you remember on the
Speech Commands window,
there are different sections
such as the Speakable Items tab,
the Application Switching tab?
Well, each of those can be
independently switched on and off,
and we've added a couple.
One is Menu Bar Navigation,
the other one is Front Window Controls.
Let me demonstrate that one for you.
I'll turn it on.
I'll try speaking those check boxes.
System-wide Specific Icon.
Whoops.
It got me right anyway.
Good.
The recognizer is a little forgiving,
and that's usually a good thing.
[Transcript missing]
You can see things are changing over in
the Speech Commands window as I say this.
And the front window controls appear
in the Speech Commands window so
again users can know what to say.
So we've seen check boxes are working,
let's try some tabs.
Spoken User Interface Speech Recognition
Spoken User Interface Spoken
User Interface This is kind of fun.
Buttons work.
Demonstrate current settings.
It's not my fault.
This is a demonstration of
your talking alert settings.
Okay, okay, okay.
Speech recognition.
System-wide Speakable Items
Application-specific Speakable
Items Application Switching
Application Switching
Front window controls.
There we go.
Okay, cool.
Let me just say something
about the acoustics up here.
We're always a little nervous about
demonstrating Speech Recognition
for the following reason.
We have designed it to work in
the acoustic environments in which
people usually use their computers.
That is in homes, in offices,
where there's a kind of background
noise and echo structure of
rooms of about that size.
Up here the noise is quite
different and the echo structure,
particularly with a PA system,
is quite different.
And as you can see,
it didn't misrecognise.
Did it mis- no, not once.
It didn't once misrecognise.
It again, it preferred to a couple of
times ask me to repeat myself.
We think that's the right thing to do.
Oh, that was that demo.
Okay, we have improvements for you,
developers.
The first one,
Oh, could we go back to the
main slide machine please?
Thank you.
We have improvements for you guys.
The first one you've been requesting for
years and we finally released it for you.
We're calling it Tune Format.
We'll go into that in a moment.
Another developer request has
been output to an audio file.
People keep asking us,
how do I get text-to-speech into a file?
Well, you can do it now.
We'll show you.
We allow you to embed speakable items
into your own application so you
don't have to worry about installing
them in the speakable items folder.
And we have some Cocoa classes.
Let's first of all
talk about Tune Format.
Those of you who have been coming
to WWDC for a while might remember
this as being called Repeat After Me.
Here's the problem.
When you send text to text-to-speech,
we try to make some rough guesses as
to how you might like it pronounced
and how you might like it intoned.
Which words you might like to emphasize,
where you might like it to pause,
where you might like
it to raise its voice,
it to lower its voice.
Those guesses may not be what you intend.
You can use a lot of controls to embed
in the text to give the synthesizer
hints and move that pronunciation around,
that intonation, I'm sorry,
that intonation around.
However,
you may get frustrated that I don't quite
know how to use these to get what I want.
Well, wouldn't it be great if you could
just take a recording of you or
your favorite voice talent saying
something the way you want it spoken
and then have the computer copy it?
Well, that's what this does.
You specify the exact
tune and timing details,
bypassing the front end of
the synthesizer and sending
them straight to the back end.
Let me give you an example.
What we have here is an
internal data visualization
tool that we use in development.
The author was a little unsure whether
we should show this to you because it has
not been beautified to his standards yet.
I will play you... Well,
let's play the demo first.
I'll play you a sentence where
the synthesizer makes the wrong
choice about the intonation.
First of all,
we'll pass the text directly to the
Jaguar version of Speech Synthesis.
[Transcript missing]
I like the good old
nuts and bolts approach.
And here she is copying me.
I like the good old
nuts and bolts approach.
So here's how it works.
Here's a plot of the relevant
internal parameters in the
synthesizer for that sentence.
The horizontal axis is time going
through that spoken sentence.
The vertical axis is the pitch,
the difference between R and R.
This line represents the pitch
contour that's been generated
by the synthesizer's rules
throughout that spoken sentence.
Can you see vertical striations
of light and dark grey?
They represent the boundaries
between the different speech sounds.
If you squint,
you might see that it says "I" there,
and then there's an "L" and then there's
an "I" and then a "K" So that's "I like".
Now, these little X's are mathematically
fitted key anchor points
to represent that contour.
We generate this contour and
then fit these to it and output
for you a text format where
there's one line per phoneme.
Here, for example, is the I,
here's the all, here's the I.
[Transcript missing]
I want to show you a couple of
interesting things that you can
do with this because I think
this tool itself produces lots
of opportunities for developers.
One of them, of course, is
Yep, here we go, good.
It's customizing the Speech output
so that within your applications,
if there are any strings that
are going to be spoken that you
know are going to be spoken,
you can use this tool to have
them spoken according to the
personality of your favorite voice
talent and therefore associate a
personality with your application.
And they'll be spoken in
the same synthesis voice,
but with that personality
as you just heard.
And so the voice is consistent
with any other synthesis that
occurs in your application.
But there are other things
that you can do with this.
I thought about applying
this to lip syncing.
Lip-syncing is a large problem
in the animation industry,
as I'm sure some of you painfully know.
You have recordings,
you have animated characters,
you want to sync them together.
There are a few tools available that
make rough guesses just by things
like the amplitude of the signal.
Well, it seemed to me that just
like this Speech Recognizer,
this special one,
can find the phonemes in the
signal to control this tune format,
similarly it could find the phonemes
in the signal to control lip-syncing.
When I looked at this,
I didn't have a talking head
that I could test this on.
So I tested it actually what
turns out to be a more rigorous,
stricter way, and that is by listening.
When you're doing animation,
there is some...
and other users have some forgiveness
in the lip-syncing being slightly
out of sync with the Speech,
but our ear is not that forgiving.
Here's an example.
This is a recording sent to
me by our buddies over in
Not Borland.
Oh, I'm sorry,
I've forgotten the name of the company.
Big company that makes lots
of multimedia applications.
From an application that
they were working on,
and their problem was that they wanted
to do lip-syncing and automate it.
So...
Here we go.
The sentence is, well,
I'll let you see if you can
figure out what the sentence is,
but what I'm going to do here at the
moment is play you out of one speaker
their recording and at the same time
you'll hear the speech synthesis saying
the same sentence with the durations of
each of the phonemes generated by the
speech synthesizer itself to let you
know what the wrong answer sounds like.
These guys are not in
sync with each other.
Do be careful as you make
your way up the paths.
Do you hear that they're different?
Do be careful as you make
your way up the paths.
Do you hear that they're
out of sync with each other?
A few nods, no?
Yep, alright, alright.
So, I passed this through that tool
and without touching the data,
just got back what that Speech Recognizer
did and told the Speech Synthesizer
to use those durations that it found
in that recording that they sent me.
Now it sounds like this.
Do be careful as you make
your way up the path.
Do you hear that now?
They're now more aligned.
But it still seems to me that there's
a little bit of misalignment there.
Do you hear it?
I'll play it again.
Do be careful as you make
your way up the path.
So I thought,
well maybe the Speech Recognizer
wasn't quite accurate on
where it found those phonemes.
Or, maybe,
what I'm thinking is differences
in alignment are really
differences in the pitch.
So using this tool, again,
without touching the data myself,
I took the pitch from their recording
and put that onto the synthesizer.
Now, it sounds like this.
Do be careful as you make
your way up the path.
Now they're aligned.
Thank you.
I'd show you this because
I think this tool is giving
you guys some opportunities to
really make some money here.
Now, this tool lets you customize the
way a particular string sounds,
a particular sentence.
That's fine if you know ahead
of time what that sentence is,
but then if you have to
synthesize something else
that you haven't seen before,
you can't take advantage of that.
Well,
it seemed to me we ought to be able to
generalize from what we have seen to
other sentences if they have a similar
syntactic structure and are used
for a similar communication purpose.
We should be able to generalize
from a few spoken examples.
So, I worked with CompuServe when they
were making a telephone access,
a service for telephone access
to information over the internet.
You get a PIN number from them,
you call a special phone number,
type in your PIN number.
And then you can get your email read out,
you can hear the news,
you can hear the weather.
The important thing is,
by typing in your PIN number,
they know who you are,
and so they want to greet you by name.
And they wanted to sound
cheery and friendly.
So they, in their eagerness but naivety,
recorded their voice talent saying
greetings to about 5,000 names
in the hope that 5,000 would
give them some kind of coverage.
How many names, Kevin,
do you think you need
to have 80% coverage?
You'd probably know about 40,000?
Oh, way more, maybe 90,000 I'd say.
90,000 names to give you 80% coverage.
So they have a problem here.
So they thought, oh, that's okay.
What we'll do is we'll use our recordings
from our voice talent if somebody
whose name we recognize calls up,
one of those 5,000.
And if you happen to
be not in that 5,000,
we'll use the Speech Synthesis.
But it didn't sound the way
they wanted it to sound.
And that's when they
came to me for some help.
I tell you this because this is what
we're making available for you guys now.
Okay, so the first thing I did was
use RepeatAfterMe to take some
of their recordings and get the
synthesizer to copy their recordings.
So what I'll play you first is the
greetings from their voice talent,
but this is not by their voice talent,
this is by the Victoria Voice with
its input controlled by the
output of this RepeatAfterMe,
this tune format tool.
Hi Lenny, good afternoon Bolin,
good morning Greg, hi Jim, hi Tom,
good morning George.
Okay, so that is synthesis and that,
I think that sounds,
I can hear in that the personality
that they're trying to convey.
The problem is, if somebody calls up
with a different name,
then they have to use synthesis.
Here I have typed in greetings,
and I've got a
[Transcript missing]
M-O-B?
M-O-V, yeah, we'll try that.
See if we can trick it.
Yes, I'm sure.
Okay, well, imagine bad synthesis.
So I took names that had very different
length and very different syllabic
structure from the names that they
sent so that I knew I wasn't cheating.
Then, when I just synthesized those,
they didn't sound anything
like that same personality.
But then I generalized from the
recordings we have using a combination
of the output in that tune format
with modifying the intonation of
the new text by a simple linear
transform from what came out of
the synthesizer when it saw that text.
This is what it sounds like.
Now, this is totally new strings that
the synthesizer has not seen before.
Hi, Kevin.
Good afternoon, Dominic.
Good morning, Dr.
Scott.
Hi, Jean.
Good morning, Lewis.
Good afternoon, Dr.
Livingstone.
So I've spent a bit of time talking
about that tool and this tune format.
May I have the main projector again,
please?
Because we're pretty excited about
it and we're delighted that at last,
after a few years,
we can move towards making
it available for you.
This tune format is not yet working in
the version of the CD that you guys have,
but it will be soon.
Okay,
we can now do output to an audio file.
And you can do this a number of ways,
but one way that's particularly
easy is through AppleScript.
May I have demo machine number four,
please?
Okay, so let's run Script Editor.
Who has not used Script Editor?
Okay, do you know what AppleScript is?
AppleScript is a scripting language
that Apple makes available for
controlling applications across
the whole operating system.
One of its characteristics is that it's
very easy to read an AppleScript program
and understand it because the
language looks sort of like English.
We have added a command to that,
we added this a little while ago,
called the SAY command.
And that lets you pass a string
into Apple Script and have it
spoken by Speech Synthesis.
[Transcript missing]
If I run that, we should hear it.
Hello, everybody.
Okay.
We have now added to that saving as,
and then you put in a file name.
[Transcript missing]
and whatever you say here
will be recorded into that
file rather than spoken.
Let's not do something as simple as
"Hello everybody." Let me go to the web
and we'll grab a piece of text from here.
Let's talk about a paragraph here.
Something that would
take a while to speak.
Copy this to the clipboard.
Switch to Script Editor.
[Transcript missing]
Get rid of that return.
Run it again.
Sorry, I've got a close quote there.
We have a close quote there.
I've got an open quote there.
Mac OS is helping out.
What am I doing wrong?
There's new lines.
Oh, oh.
Got to watch that.
Now, is there one there?
And is there one there?
Let's try that again.
Alright, let's try something smaller.
Let us try something shorter for now.
I don't want to go
searching for these things.
Alright, let's try that.
Let's retype that.
Say, "Will it work this time?" It's
been working for me for weeks.
[Transcript missing]
Include something that
could take people's email.
May I have the main machine again?
You could take people's email and
read each email message into an audio
file and then download that onto
a person's iPod so that as they're
cycling to work in the morning they
could be listening to their email.
We think there's an opportunity
here for you developers.
Okay,
so we've talked about the tune format,
we've talked about output to audio files.
Let's talk for a moment about
embedded speakable commands.
I mentioned that there are
application-specific folders that
can contain commands only speakable
in those applications while that
application is in the foreground.
Several of you have already
been using that by shipping
with your applications speakable
commands for those applications,
and it's sometimes
tricky to install them.
You install them in the speakable
items folder if the user has one,
if the user doesn't have one,
it's a little unclear.
So now,
you don't have to install them at all.
You just bundle them into your
application package in a folder,
and we will find them.
and we'd like... Well, thank you.
Obviously somebody's been doing this.
And we've got Cocoa classes at last.
There's been a lot of rumours on the net.
Thank you.
This has been requested by lots of
developers and we've tried to make these
simple to adopt and simple to code and
do them in such a way that we prepare
for the future because in the format that
it should be pretty straightforward to
incorporate these into Interface Builder.
But at the moment,
they're just available as classes.
They're not in Interface Builder.
There are two main classes,
Speech Synthesis and Speech Recognition.
The Speech Synthesis is a
single class and it can speak
any string synchronously.
It's really easy.
It's one line.
If you need asynchronous speech, that is,
you want to animate the screen
or do something else in your
application while it's speaking,
or you want more control,
such as highlighting words while
they're spoken or doing lip syncing,
then you can set up a delegate for
notification and there's a lot more
control like that that you can get.
For Speech Recognition, again,
there's one class to
use in the simple case.
You get a shared instance of that class,
you specify which commands
you want to listen to,
and then you just begin listening.
This takes, does in three lines,
what in the Carbon API would
take somewhere between three
and five pages of code.
Is that fair, Tom?
So we think we've made it easier for you.
If you want to do something
more sophisticated,
such as having the recognizer
parse the spoken string and give
you back the parsed version,
or make some things that people
speak optional so that the
recognizer can recognize fragments,
then there's a handful of classes
available to build a language
model and deal with those cases.
So we've tried to set this up to
be very quick and easy to adopt,
just a couple of lines
for the simple case,
but all the power of the original
API there if you need to do the
things that we have found developers
need to do for more sophisticated
uses of the speech technology.
and we've improved the user experience.
I've already shown you
some of the accessibility
features we've done for users.
In addition,
we have some new speakable items and we
have something called Semantic Inference.
To demonstrate the speakable items,
I'd like to invite Dr.
Tom Bonura up onto the stage.
Tom.
Thank you.
Hi.
I'm going to try to whip through this.
There are a number of interesting
new speakable items in Jaguar,
and I'm just going to show you one that
I think is particularly interesting.
So let's just go right into it.
Could I have, okay,
we have the right machine.
Hide this application.
Switch to TextEdit.
The first thing I'd like to show you
is something that's actually in PUMA,
or in the released version
of Speech Recognition.
Define a keyboard command.
And the idea here is that you
should be able to define your own
spoken commands by simply saying,
"define a keyboard command."
And so this is just a way of
defining a keyboard shortcut.
So I'm going to say Command-A is
going to be represented as Select All.
Which it usually is in
applications and I'll say,
well, in TextEdit only we'll refer
to select all as Command-A.
So now we have created an
application-specific speakable item
and I just did it on the fly and
I can just simply say select all.
and it did.
Okay, well that's cool and it means that
all of your users can now define
their own commands if there's a
keyboard equivalent for a menu item,
which is a good thing.
So let's go a little further.
And let's say I'm interested in
this piece of text and I'd like
to use it over and over again.
Make this speakable.
Okay, so this little bit of
functionality says when I say,
now I'm going to type the
phrase that I'm interested in.
[Transcript missing]
In any application context,
it's going to insert
that little bit of text.
[Transcript missing]
Insert my work address.
Okay, so it did the right thing.
Now, let's go a little further.
And here I have a picture that
I took last year in Hawaii.
Make this speakable.
[Transcript missing]
Let's save it away.
So now, if I want to use that in the
context of an application,
switch to mail, switch to mail,
Insert my great golf picture.
It does the right thing.
So, there's--
There's a lot of fun stuff like this.
Shh, quiet.
There's a lot of fun
stuff like this in Jaguar,
and we think that users will be able
to build a whole lot of very compelling
and very useful little speakable macros,
if you will,
using this kind of functionality.
Let me go back and turn
things over to Kim.
I'll be back.
Thanks Tom.
Okay,
so let's talk about semantic inference.
We are so excited about this.
Here's the problem.
Back when we were less confident
about our Speech Recognizer
and it was less robust,
we only shipped about 20, 30 commands.
Users would only have about 50
commands of things that were speakable.
That's all the Recognizer
could reliably handle.
And that was fine.
It was easy to remember
the set of commands.
But now that the Recognizer
is so much stronger,
we're finding we and others
have hundreds of commands.
The burden is now on the user to remember
the exact wording of those commands.
And if you get it wrong,
you're out of luck.
Here's why.
The way the Recognizer works is that
you load it up with a language model,
which is a list of what
it's supposed to listen for.
Then if it hears something
that's in that language model,
it'll listen for it.
Then if it hears something
that's in that language model,
such as, what time is it,
that goes into the search,
and the search finds which path
through the language model most
closely matches that utterance.
Associated with that path
is a speakable action,
such as, in this case, speaking the time.
The problem is, what happens if the
person accidentally says,
what is the time?
Now you can feed that into the search,
and you know what'll happen?
Nothing.
Because there's no path through
the grammar to match that.
So,
our solution is to use the Recognizer.
Thank you all.
That was not talking alerts.
Okay, we're about on time.
We're doing okay here.
So the solution is we take out that
whole approach to language modeling.
and replace that language model with a
more flexible extended language model.
The details of which we'll be happy
to talk about in the question time
or afterwards if you want to know.
Now,
when we pass what is the time in there,
we do get a string of words that
comes out of the recognizer.
But now we have the problem.
Since it's not a string
of words that we've seen,
necessarily seen before,
how do we map it to the speakable action
that was associated with what time is it?
Well, basically, a miracle occurs.
And because of that miracle,
we can indeed still map
it to Speak the time.
The truth is,
it's not actually a miracle.
It's a technology called
Latent Semantic Mapping,
and it was introduced in the keynote.
This is the technology that we
gave to the mail group to use
for the junk mail detection.
In the case of junk mail detection,
we are looking for two categories:
junk or not junk.
Here, we can map any string by looking
at a statistical representation
of the components of its meaning,
map any string to a set of
categories which are defined
as being the speakable actions.
Do we have time for Tom to demo this?
You want that?
Alright, applaud Tom.
We're going to really skate
on a little thin ice here.
We are really going to push things.
This is brand new.
This is very exciting technology.
This is...
I'm going to appear in Jaguar.
I don't know if this actually
is part of your release,
but it's very exciting and it's...
It's very, very... how shall I put it?
This is somewhat more taxing on
our Speech Recognition engine.
And so, because of the room acoustics,
I'm going to change my strategy a little
bit and rather than use the in-built mic,
I'm going to try this
with a closed talking mic,
which none of us actually likes to use.
[Transcript missing]
is something that we're referring
to right now in this control panel
as allow command name variations.
So the idea, as Kim said,
is a lot of times you
know what you want to do,
but you don't quite
remember how to say it.
And we want to provide a mechanism
that allows the user to do,
to be very forgiving or to be
forgiven by the recognition system.
So let's turn this on
and see how far we get.
Let me just test it a little bit.
What time is it?
By the way, we also can adjust the
gain on these microphones.
What time is it?
Quit this application.
Well, we may be having some problems.
What time is it?
Okay, I'm going to really go on thin ice
and I'm going to try the built-in mic.
What time is it?
Now, I'm going to try the built-in mic.
It's 18:10.
What time is it?
Well, we'll see how far we get.
Switch to Finder.
Kim, I think I'm going to punt on this
because we're really short on time
and I don't want to push it too much.
The normalization started moving
towards the head-mounted microphone
and then when he was moving it back,
it started moving back.
If we persevere with it,
we've done some tests.
Somewhere in this case, in this room,
it takes up to 20 repetitions of some
commands before the normalization
has reached the right space and
then it seems to perform fine.
We won't keep you with that.
Tim, let me just try one more thing.
I'm going to start it once again
and if it doesn't do anything,
then we'll punt.
What time is it?
No.
Let's not go with it.
We won't text you guys.
Here's the message for
you developers about this.
This is a change in the overall concept
of how speech recognition works.
We're not trying to recognize the words.
We're trying to recognize the meaning
by a technology that's actually been
quite well proven now in the way
that it works for classifying word
strings according to their meaning,
and the recognizer is capable
of catching those word strings.
We'll encourage you to try it out.
Is this in the Jaguar WWDC CD?
This is not.
Look for subsequent seeds.
The way this works is the standard
approach to dealing with this
problem is to sit down ahead of
time and try to imagine every way
that people might say every command.
Right, exactly.
You end up with this huge list,
and the next person who comes along says
something that you didn't anticipate.
Instead,
you gather examples of the different
ways that people might say each of the
spoken commands for your application.
Then you train what we
call a latent semantic map,
which can generalize from those and
look at other strings and see that
they are similar in structure to those
examples by looking at word pairs,
word triples, and co-occurrences of words
statistically represented.
We're not making the API available
to developers in Jaguar because we
want to iterate on that API ourselves
a little bit and get more experience
with the technology and understand
the constraints in using it.
But you can start thinking
about it because our intention
is indeed to make it available.
And the way to start thinking about it
is to start gathering alternative ways
to say the commands in your applications.
Don't go crazy and try to get as
creative and as imaginative as you can.
We know you're a very
imaginative bunch of folk.
But look at what a naive user is likely
to say if they know what can be done by
speech but don't remember how to say it.
And start building up those lists so
that you're ready for us by the time
we're ready to release this to you.
So what we've done, let me summarize,
is talked through a whole bunch
of things that are new in Jaguar.
We're working on Speech Synthesis.
You've seen a work in progress.
Expect that work to keep going.
You've seen widespread incorporation
of speech into the user interface,
which means that your
applications are speakable,
whether you do anything about it or not.
What you can do about it is make
sure that they work well by making
sure that your texts and strings
sound okay when they're spoken,
by using standard sheets,
standard alerts, and standard controls,
because that's what will be spoken.
If you really want to
use a custom control,
then you can associate an
alternative string with that control,
which is,
we will see and we will speak that
string if people select that control.
And test that when people say
these controls themselves,
that the speech recognition works.
We've shown you that people can
navigate the user interface by voice,
and we've shown you semantic inference,
and Cocoa classes.
We have some more information
here about how to use these,
but I think you guys can
figure it out for yourselves.
Let's end up the main session now,
and we'll hang around here and
outside to talk about this further.
Once again,
I want to thank you for staying so late.
Thank you.